According to Arthur (2015), the study of complexity can not be anymore dissociated from intensive
computational practices. Modeling and simulation have indeed taken a crucial role in the extraction of
knowledge, especially in the study of systems with a high complexity such as socio-technical systems.
Furthermore, Rey-Coyrehourcq (2015) gives the example of theoretical and quantitative geography is
a perfect illustration of how methodological, technical, empirical and theoretical advances necessarily
strongly bind together: the use of computation centers in the seventies would be comparable to the
current democratization of grid computing which impact dramatically changes the way social science is
practiced.
The development of the OpenMole software for model exploration (Reuillon et al., 2013) is accompa-
nied by a progressive shift in simulation practices. Three fundamental innovative axis distinguish this new
philosophy and technology compared to existing approaches in simulation: (i) the embedding of models
within workflows, making model coupling and multi-modeling easier; (ii) the provision of novel heuristic
methods for model exploration; and (iii) the transparent access to various intensive computation infras-
tructures. Banos (2017) emphasizes how this “knowledge accelerator” favors the construction of a robust
and experimental social science, by the introduction of tools to deal with main requirements for it coined
out by Banos (2013): multiple heterogenous models can be compared and coupled in an interdisciplinar
approach within a new incremental methodology introduced by Cottineau et al. (2015), models and work-
flows are open to ensure reproducibility, the behavior of models is better known with specific methods
such as the Pattern Space Exploration algorithm developed by Chérel et al. (2015) that provide the out-
put feasible space of a model or the Calibration Profile algorithm Reuillon et al. (2015), multi-objective
approaches to model optimization are implemented in genetic algorithms for model calibration Schmitt
et al. (2015).
The aim of this symposium is take a reflexive positioning on these trends, situate them regarding
similar practices, and establish the most crucial future issues to be tackled within that stream of research.
Therefore, (i) two invited talks by D. Pumain and R. Reuillon, main investigators of the ERC project
Geodivercity in which most of the aforementioned research took place (Pumain and Reuillon, 2017), will
first sketch the current landscape of these approaches, both from an epistemological point of view in the
particular case of geography and from a methodological point of view; (ii) more specialized invited talks
will illustrate particular issues still open for the exploration of complex models of simulation; (iii) open
contributions will put these research into the broader framework of computational science; (iv) a wrap-up
round-table will aim at exchanging and reflecting on future research directions.
Contributions are open to any research developing new methods, practices, theories and epistemologies
related to models of simulation. No fields are privileged but the entanglement of theory, modeling andempirics will be an important feature to bring a relevant contribution to the debates. Methodological
contributions are as much welcomed as contributions in epistemology or history of science. The objective
is truly to reinforce an interdisciplinary perspective on modeling and simulation.
